The Data source guide review for-3-15 (#43371)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/datasource.adoc

[[jdbc-and-reactive-datasources-simultaneously]]
==== JDBC and reactive datasources simultaneously

When both a JDBC extension - along with Agroal - and a reactive datasource extension for the same database kind are included, both kinds of datasources will be created by default.

* To use the <<jdbc-datasource,JDBC>> and <<reactive-datasource,reactive>> datasourceces simultaneously:
+
[source,properties]
----
%prod.quarkus.datasource.reactive.url=postgresql:///your_database
%prod.quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/hibernate_orm_test
----

> As shown below, it is also possible to disable automatic datasource creation by explicitly specifying what datasource should not be created.

Author: Will redo. Thank you!

[[jdbc-and-reactive-datasources-simultaneously]]
==== JDBC and reactive datasources simultaneously

When both a JDBC extension and a reactive datasource extension for the same database kind are included, both JDBC and reactive datasources will be created by default.

> * To use the <<jdbc-datasource,JDBC>> and <<reactive-datasource,reactive>> datasourceces simultaneously:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To use the <<jdbc-datasource,JDBC>> and <<reactive-datasource,reactive>> datasources simultaneously:
```

Author: Good catch, thank you.

----

[[datasource-active]]
=== Activate or deactivate datasources

When a datasource is configured at build time, it is active by default at runtime.
This means that Quarkus will start the corresponding JDBC connection pool or reactive client when the application starts.

To deactivate a datasource at runtime, set `quarkus.datasource[.optional name].active` to `false`.
Quarkus will then skip starting the JDBC connection pool or reactive client during application startup.

> Any attempt to use the deactivated datasource at runtime will result in a clear error message.

Reviewer 2: Saying that it results in an error message may be misleading, because then one might think that it will only print a message into the log. But it actually throws an exception - see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/3.15.0/extensions/datasource/common/src/main/java/io/quarkus/datasource/common/runtime/DataSourceUtil.java#L53

So my suggestion would be

> Any attempt to use the deactivated datasource at runtime results in an exception.

> Any attempt to use the deactivated datasource at runtime will result in a clear error message.

Author: great @jmartisk , applying!

[[datasource-multiple-single-transaction]]
=== Use multiple datasources in a single transaction

> By default, XA support on datasources is disabled. Therefore, a transaction might include no more than one datasource.

Reviewer: Grammar: it's "may" here, isn't it?

Feel free to ignore, I'm not a native speaker, but this feels wrong.

```suggestion
By default, XA support on datasources is disabled. Therefore, a transaction may include no more than one datasource.
```

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Not a native speaker myself.
I know it may sound funny, but the IBM style guide doesn't allow us to use the word "may" in technical documentation unless it is used to indicate permission. It clearly states that we should use "might" instead when describing a possibility.
Have a look:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5f15a1d5-27a2-4ba7-a181-22e272de95c4)

Reviewer 2: Well, this *is* about a permission. It's not allowed to include more than one datasource.

Author: `It's not allowed to include more than one datasource.`
Why is it not stated directly in the text, then?

Reviewer 2: > `It's not allowed to include more than one datasource.` Why is it not stated directly in the text, then?

It is, the original text says "Attempting to access multiple non-XA datasources in the same transaction
would result in an exception similar to this" - that implies that it's not allowed to enlist more datasources in the transaction.

Author: OK

[NOTE]
====

> If your transaction involves other non-datasource resources, keep in mind these resources might not support XA transactions, or might require additional configuration.

Reviewer: Again feel free to ignore, but just in case this was unintended...

Reminder that commas are the difference between "Let's eat, Grandpa!" and "Let's eat Grandpa!" ...

In my mind:

1. "other, non-datasource resources" = "other resources that happen to not be datasources"
2. "other non-datasource resources" = "other resources that are not datasource, **like this one**"

So this change seems to change the meaning of the sentences.

```suggestion
If your transaction involves other, non-datasource resources, keep in mind these resources might not support XA transactions, or might require additional configuration.
```

Author: Hey, @yrodiere, great catch again. You are right here; I didn't have the right context. That's why we are asking for reviews.

To explain it better and to make it even clearer, can we go with:

If your transaction involves other resources, which are specifically non-datasource resources, be aware that these resources might not support XA transactions or might require additional configuration.

Reviewer 2: That sounds a bit clunky to me and repeats the word 'resources'... I'd go either with Yoann's suggestion, or

If your transaction involves other types of resources (non-datasource),...

Reviewer 2: Then I'd just go with Yoann's suggestion :) that's accurate and clear too, and doesn't repeat 'resources' too many times.

Author: OK, I am currently for accepting @yrodiere suggestion, but wouldn't it be possible to phrase it like this?

If your transaction involves non-datasource resources, be aware that they might not support XA transactions or might require additional configuration.

Reviewer 2: I think that's fine

====

If XA cannot be enabled for one of your datasources:

* Be aware that enabling XA for all datasources _except one_ (and only one) is still supported through https://www.narayana.io/docs/project/index.html#d5e857[Last Resource Commit Optimization (LRCO)].
* If you do not need a rollback for one datasource to trigger a rollback for other datasources, consider splitting your code into multiple transactions.
To that end, use xref:transaction.adoc#programmatic-approach[`QuarkusTransaction.requiringNew()`]/xref:transaction.adoc#declarative-approach[`@Transactional(REQUIRES_NEW)`] (preferably) or xref:transaction.adoc#legacy-api-approach[`UserTransaction`] (for more complex use cases).

[CAUTION]
====

> As a last resort, and for compatibility with Quarkus 3.8 and earlier, you might allow unsafe transaction handling across multiple non-XA datasources by setting `quarkus.transaction-manager.unsafe-multiple-last-resources` to `allow`.

Reviewer 3: What does the "You might allow" imply here?  That you should do it? That you are allowed to do it? Either way, the wording should be replaced with something way more actionable.

Reviewer 2: This should definitely be "may", not "might"

Author: What about this?

Only when all other options are exhausted, and for compatibility with Quarkus 3.8 and earlier, you can allow unsafe transaction handling across multiple non-XA datasources by setting `quarkus.transaction-manager.unsafe-multiple-last-resources` to `allow`.

Reviewer 4: option 2  also looks good to me.

Author: Great, applying! Thank you!

> With this property set to `allow`, a transaction rollback could possibly be applied to only some of the non-XA datasources, with other non-XA datasources having already committed their changes, leaving your overall system in an inconsistent state.

Reviewer 3: The "could be applied" is meant to imply something along the lines of "is likely to happen", or is it meant to talk about something that the user should actively perform? Please use modal with utmost care, if at all.

Reviewer 2: It's something that could potentially happen (but not very often). So I think the wording here is ok.

Reviewer 4: I'd say the rollback could only applied to the last one `non-XA` datasource always.

Author: @zhfeng @jmartisk Can we go with this?

With this property set to `allow`, a transaction rollback could only be applied to the last non-XA datasource, while other non-XA datasources could have already committed their changes, potentially leaving your overall system in an inconsistent state.

Reviewer 2: "could" without "possibly" sounds a bit unclear, it sounds like it's in past tense.
I would go with

With this property set to `allow`, it may happen that a transaction rollback will only be applied to the last non-XA datasource, while other non-XA datasources have already committed their changes, potentially leaving your overall system in an inconsistent state.

Author: I already stated my POV regarding the usage of `may` in tech docs in the PR.

If I reword it so that I don't have to use "may" + make it more direct and action-oriented + shorter, direct phrasing (that's what the docs should be about if possible), I am getting something like this :) :

Setting this property to `allow` can lead to a transaction rollback which will be applied only to the last non-XA datasource, while other non-XA datasources have already committed their changes, potentially leaving your overall system in an inconsistent state.

Reviewer 2: > Setting this property to allow can lead to a transaction rollback

.. and this sounds to me like you're talking about a one-time event. Like: Once you set the property to `allow`, it can lead to a transaction rollback (one rollback)...

If `may` is the problem (which I personally don't think...) then just replace it with `might`.

Author: OK

> Alternatively, you can allow the same unsafe behavior, but with warnings when it is taken advantage of:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can allow the same unsafe behavior, but with warnings when it takes effect:
```

> * Setting the property to `warn-each` would result in logging a warning on *each* offending transaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Setting the property to `warn-each` results in logging a warning on *each* offending transaction.
```

> * Setting the property to `warn-first` would result in logging a warning on the *first* offending transaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Setting the property to `warn-first` results in logging a warning on the *first* offending transaction.
```

To use tracing with a datasource, you need to add the xref:opentelemetry-tracing.adoc[`quarkus-opentelemetry`] extension to your project.

> You don't need to declare a different driver because you need tracing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You do not need to declare a different driver because you need tracing.
```

Reviewer 3: What does the "because you need tracing" part mean here, though? Is it like "Even if you need tracing, you don't need to declare a tracker". Or is it more along the lines of "Due to the fact you need tracing, you do not need to..."? Either way, the language should be clearer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You don't need to declare a different driver to enable tracing.
```

> If you use a JDBC driver, you need to follow the instructions in the OpenTelemetry extension xref:opentelemetry-tracing.adoc#jdbc[here].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you use a JDBC driver, you need to follow xref:opentelemetry-tracing.adoc#jdbc[the instructions in the OpenTelemetry extension].
```
